Marcel Hekking, Edzard S. Gelsema, Jan Lindemans

Parts are published in: Clinical Biochemistry 1995; 6:581--585

Figure 4--1. The joint distribution of two hypothetical standard normal
univariate distributions. The correlation coefficient r between both
variables has been set to 0.8. Projections of horizontal cross-sections
at the 5% probability density level yield two types of reference
regions: the square and the ellipse. Differences between these regions
are explained further in Figure 4 --2.

Figure 4--2. Discrepancy between a multiple univariate reference region
and a single multivariate reference region. Plotted horizontally and
vertically are the probability densities of analyte 1 and 2 of Figure 4
--1, respectively. Using the region enclosed by the two univariate
reference intervals as a reference region, observations 1 and 2 are a
false negative and a false positive observation, respectively when the
95% reference ellipse is taken as the standard \[7, 20\].

Figure 4--3. The standard deviation correction factor (CF) at 24
specific χ^2^ cut-off fractiles for a bivariate Gaussian distribution.

Figure 4--4. Flow-chart of trimming procedure to determine the
background model parameters in a bivariate distribution of patient data.
CF is the correction factor for the estimated standard deviations and KS
stands for the size-adjusted Kolmogorov-Smirnov test. See text for
further explanation.

Table 4--1. Distribution characteristics (m is mean, s is standard
deviation and r is Pearson's product correlation coefficient between
PC1\' and PC2\') after trimming.

Figure 4--5. Fit of the observed cumulative probabilities of the
remaining d*^2^*values of the trimmed ELIbe data set (thick line) with
the theoretical cumulative χ*^2^*(2) probability distribution (thin
line). P is the cumulative probability. \*D~max~ is the test statistic
of the adapted and size-adjusted Kolmogorov-Smirnov test, indicating the
degree of fit of the d*^2^*values with the theoretical distribution. In
this case there is not enough evidence (p \> 0.05) to reject the
H~o~-hypothesis of fit.

Figure 4--6. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellipse (outer ellipse) for the ELIbe data set

igure 4--7. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellips

Figure 4--8. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellipse (outer ellipse) for the OLVGbe data set

Figure 4--9. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellipse (outer ellipse) for the SKZbe data set.

Figure 4--10. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellipse (outer ellipse) for the ELIab data set.

Figure 4--11. The 30% equal probability ellipse (inner ellipse) and the
95% equal probability ellipse (outer ellipse) for the OLVGab data set.
